Born near Trapani, Sicily, Peter Clemenza is one of Don Vito Corleone's caporegimes[3] and oldest friends, as well as the godfather of his eldest son, Sonny. He has a reputation as a superb judge of talent; his regime produced no fewer than five future capos—Sonny, Frank Pentangeli, Rocco Lampone, Al Neri, and Joey Zasa.
He is a supporting character in the story, but several of his actions are key to the plot. For example, he is ordered by Don Corleone, via consigliere Tom Hagen, to oversee the punishment of two teenage boys who received suspended sentences for beating and attempting to rape the daughter of undertaker Amerigo Bonasera. Vito's wife, Mrs. Corleone, is the girl's god-mother. Clemenza assigns the job to his "button man" Paulie Gatto, who recruits two former professional boxers turned Corleone Family loan enforcers to assist. A deleted scene from the film depicts Gatto delivering the beating.[citation needed]
When the family discovers that Gatto helped Virgil Sollozzo and the Tattaglia Family set up Vito to be assassinated, Sonny orders Clemenza to execute him. Clemenza considers Gatto's actions a personal insult, having recruited and personally groomed him. According to the novel, Sonny Corleone initially suspects Clemenza was involved in the conspiracy, but Clemenza is eventually cleared. Clemenza chooses Rocco Lampone, then an associate, to do the hit on Gatto so Lampone can "make his bones." Clemenza has Gatto drive him and Lampone around for several hours on the pretext of locating housing for Corleone soldiers in the event war breaks out with the other crime families. After Lampone shoots Gatto, Clemenza—upon returning to the car after relieving himself—utters (to Lampone) his most famous line in the film: "Leave the gun. Take the cannoli."[4]
When it is decided that Vito's youngest son, Michael, will murder drug kingpin Virgil Sollozzo and Captain McCluskey, a corrupt NYPD cop on Sollozzo's payroll, Clemenza instructs Michael on using a gun, how to allay Sollozzo's suspicions, and what to do after the shooting. The plan succeeds, and while Michael hides in Sicily, Clemenza prepares for an all-out war against the remaining four families. The war ultimately claims Sonny's life, and Vito resumes his leadership role. Upon returning to New York, Michael succeeds his father as the family's operating head. Clemenza and fellow caporegime Salvatore Tessio, doubting Michael as Don, request permission to break off from the Corleone family and start their own families in accordance with Vito's promise made several years earlier. Michael agrees, but insists they wait a short while longer, needing to complete the family's transition to Las Vegas. When Michael is targeted for assassination by Don Emilio Barzini, who was behind Sonny's murder, Clemenza is initially suspected of being the Corleone family traitor. Tessio is the traitor, and he is killed.
Clemenza, on Michael's orders, personally murders both Don Victor Stracci and Carlo Rizzi, Michael's brother-in-law, who conspired with Barzini to murder Sonny. In the book, Clemenza is last seen greeting Michael as "Don Corleone" and kissing Michael's hand.
