Born in 1925, Connie is the youngest child and only daughter of Don Vito Corleone and Carmela Corleone. She is the sister of Sonny, Fredo and Michael Corleone. She marries Sonny's friend Carlo Rizzi.[3] Her father was very displeased that Connie married a man who was not only half northern Italian, but also had a criminal history. He only agreed to the marriage on condition that they hold an old-style Sicilian wedding.
Carlo, who Puzo characterizes as "a punk sore at the world", periodically abuses and cheats on Connie in frustration at being shunted aside by the Corleone family. The night of their wedding turned out to be a harbinger of things to come; he gave Connie a black eye when she refused to give him a purse containing cash gifts from the wedding guests.
After one particularly bad beating, Connie complains to her father, who refuses to help. The book reveals that in truth, Vito was outraged at how Carlo treated Connie, but felt powerless to interfere; Italian tradition forbade a father from interfering in a daughter's marriage. Connie's family grow to resent Carlo and his mistreatment of Connie, especially her oldest brother Sonny. One day, when Sonny visits Connie, he finds her in tears and a bruised face. Sonny chases and beats up Carlo in the street, threatening to kill Carlo if he hurts Connie again.
Corleone rivals Emilio Barzini and Philip Tattaglia recruit Carlo to bring Sonny into the open. Carlo has a mistress call the house and a fight with Connie ensues that ends with Carlo again beating Connie. Connie calls the Corleone compound asking Sonny for help. An enraged Sonny drives off alone to help Connie, leaving his bodyguards following in a separate car. At a toll booth Sonny is shot and killed by Barzini's Tommy gun-wielding men.
Michael returns from Sicily and takes Sonny's place as Vito's heir apparent. When Vito dies, Michael becomes the new Don and avenges Sonny's murder by having the heads of the Five Families killed and Carlo garroted by Peter Clemenza. Connie flies into a rage when she finds out Carlo is dead and blames Michael, denouncing him in front of his wife Kay.
