Unlike his two older brothers, Michael shuns the Corleone "family business", wanting an ordinary, more Americanized life. (Vito does not want Michael to join the Corleone criminal empire either, preferring that his favorite son go into politics.) When the United States enters World War II in 1941, Michael drops out of Dartmouth College and enlists in the Marine Corps. During the war, he fights in the Pacific. He receives a battlefield commission to the rank of captain and is awarded the Navy Cross for bravery. In 1944, his war heroism is featured in Life magazine. He is discharged early in 1945 due to a disabling wound; unbeknownst to him, his father had arranged his release. He returns home to attend his sister Connie's wedding, accompanied by Kay Adams, his college sweetheart. Michael stays for a few weeks before re-entering college without consulting his family.
Just before Christmas 1945, Vito is severely wounded in an assassination attempt by drug kingpin Virgil Sollozzo, throwing Michael into the middle of the Mafia world he had for so long avoided. Michael reaffirms his loyalty at his father's bedside, then prevents Sollozzo's second attempt on Vito's life. Captain McCluskey, a corrupt NYPD officer on Sollozzo's payroll, breaks Michael's jaw. Knowing that his father's life is in danger while Sollozzo lives, Michael proposes that he murder Sollozzo and McCluskey. Sonny dismisses the idea, believing that killing McCluskey would invite police retribution; it is a hard and fast rule in the American Mafia that policemen are not to be harmed. However, Michael persuades him that McCluskey has crossed into their world by serving as Sollozzo's bodyguard, and is therefore fair game. A meeting between Sollozzo and Michael is arranged. At the restaurant, Michael retrieves a handgun that his father's caporegime Peter Clemenza had planted in the bathroom and kills Sollozzo and McCluskey.
Michael flees to Sicily and spends two years under the protection of Vito's longtime ally, Don Tommasino. While there, Michael marries a young local woman named Apollonia Vitelli. A few months later, Michael is notified that Sonny has been murdered. As he and Apollonia prepare to move to a safer villa in Syracusa, she is killed by a car bomb intended for Michael. Fabrizio, Michael's bodyguard, planted the bomb after being bought off by the Corleones' rivals.
Michael returns to the United States in early 1951[3] and assumes Sonny's role as Vito's heir apparent. He and his father plot to wipe out the other New York Dons, deliberately allowing them to whittle away at the Corleone interests in order to lull them into inaction. Meanwhile, Michael convinces his father the time is right to remove the family from the Mafia. More than a year after his return, Michael reunites with Kay and they marry. He promises her the Corleone family will be completely legitimate in five years. Within two years, they have two children, Anthony and Mary. In the novel, Kay gives birth to two sons.
Vito semi-retires in 1954, and Michael becomes operating head of the family. He attempts to buy out casino owner Moe Greene's stake in the Las Vegas casino that the Corleones bankrolled, intending to move the family to Nevada and legitimize all Corleone enterprises, but Greene refuses to sell. Before his death in 1955, Vito warns Michael that Emilio Barzini, head of a rival family, will likely attempt to assassinate Michael under the pretense of establishing peace between the families. Vito tells Michael that whoever approaches him about the meeting is the traitor within the family. When caporegime Salvatore Tessio unknowingly exposes his complicity with Barzini by arranging the meeting, Michael sets the plan in motion to murder the other New York Mafia heads: Barzini, Philip Tattaglia, Carmine Cuneo, and Victor Stracci, as well as Moe Greene. The plot unfolds on the same day Michael stands as godfather to Connie's newborn son. Later the same day, Tessio and Carlo Rizzi, Connie's abusive husband who conspired in Sonny's murder, are executed. In one stroke, Michael re-establishes the Corleone family as the nation's most powerful crime family, and makes a reputation for himself as being even more cunning and ruthless than his father.
Connie accuses Michael of murdering Carlo. Michael dismisses her accusations as hysteria, and, when questioned by Kay, denies any involvement. In the novel, Connie recants her accusations a few weeks later, assuring Kay she was mistaken. Kay, initially believing Michael, later observes him receiving his capos. Clemenza addresses Michael as "Don Corleone" and kisses his hand in the same manner that he did with Michael's father. Kay realizes Connie's accusations were true - and that Michael has become his father's successor in every way. In the novel, Kay briefly leaves Michael, but Hagen persuades her to return.
