Hagen is the informally adopted son of Don Vito Corleone, is a qualified lawyer, and the consigliere to the Corleone Mafia family.[2] Mild-mannered and soft-spoken, he serves as the voice of reason within the family. The novel and first film establish that he is of German-Irish ancestry.
Sonny Corleone befriends 11-year-old Tom, who was living on the street after running away from an orphanage. When Sonny brings Tom home and demands he be taken in, the Corleone family allowed him to stay. Hagen considers Vito his true father, though Vito never formally adopts Tom, believing it disrespectful to Hagen's deceased parents. After law school, Hagen wanted to work in the Corleone business. His non-Italian ancestry precludes his formal membership into the Mafia, but after the Don's consigliere, Genco Abbandando, dies, Hagen is given his position. This results in the other New York families derisively calling the Corleones, "The Irish Gang."
Though Hagen immerses himself in the Sicilian-American lifestyle, and speaks Sicilian, he has a "non-Italian" physical appearance. His Northern European appearance being advantageous to his work, allowing him to travel and conduct family business openly without potential witnesses remembering him.
While Hagen loves all the Corleones, he idolizes Sonny, and blames himself for Sonny's murder. When Vito semi-retires in 1954, and his youngest son, Michael, succeeds him as the operating head of the family, Michael removes Hagen as consigliere, preferring his father informally assume the role. Hagen is thus restricted to handling the family's legitimate business. Michael claims Hagen is not a "war-time" consigliere. In the novel, Hagen later tells Michael that he figured out the real reason that he was demoted, though this reason is only alluded to.[further explanation needed]
The novel and first film portray Hagen aiding Vito and Michael Corleone in warring against the other ruling New York Mafia families. In The Godfather Part II, set in the late 1950s, Hagen serves as Michael's right-hand man during his power struggle with Hyman Roth. In The Godfather Part III, set in 1979-1980, he is said to have died some years before in an unspecified manner. His role in the story between the second and third films, including his death, is portrayed in Mark Winegardner's sequel novels, The Godfather Returns and The Godfather's Revenge.
